# 2.3 Plasma

The practical implementation of state channels and sidechain solutions exposed certain flaws, leading to the proposal of the Plasma solution, which received substantial attention. It tackles two problems identified in the previous approaches:

- **Inability to send funds to non-participants**: An account unconnected to the Plasma chain can receive funds and independently withdraw them to Layer 1.
Inability to inherit Layer 1 security: Plasma periodically submits information to the main chain, thus inheriting Layer 1 security.
- **Inability to send funds to non-participants**: An account unconnected to the Plasma chain can receive funds and independently withdraw them to Layer 1.
Inability to inherit Layer 1 security: Plasma periodically submits information to the main chain, thus inheriting Layer 1 security.

&nbsp; 
## Plasma and Merkle Trees

In Plasma, a specific fund amount is locked in Layer 1 using a smart contract, and then a node operator carries out transactions in Layer 2. The operator maintains a small ledger in the form of a Merkle tree, which logs the state information of Layer 2 accounts and is responsible for storing and publicly disclosing all transaction records.

<MdxImg src="/assets/2.3.1.gif" width="600px" alt="Merkle Tree.gif" />

_Merkle trees use a hash algorithm <sup>[1]</sup> wherein the content of each child node affects the hash value of the preceding node. Consequently, if any data stored in the Merkle tree is altered, even a minor character change, it will trigger a cascading effect, altering the hash values of the nodes above, ultimately resulting in a change in the root hash of the Merkle tree. Anyone can independently compute the hash algorithm to check if the calculated hash value matches the publicly available hash value, thereby verifying whether the content has been tampered with._

Plasma operators need to periodically upload the root proof of the Merkle tree, known as the "state root," to Layer 1, enabling everyone to check if the Layer 2 ledger has been tampered with.

&nbsp; 
## Nested Chains

Moreover, Plasma supports the concept of **nested chains**, where root proofs are submitted to another Plasma chain instead of Layer 1, thus creating a nested blockchain structure.

This feature allows for scalable expansion and was once regarded as a highly promising solution.

<MdxImg src="/assets/2.3.2.gif" width="600px" alt="Plasma Chain.gif" />eb

_Different Plasma chains have varying intervals for uploading the state root to Ethereum Layer 1. It could be every 5 minutes or every hour. A Plasma chain may choose to upload the state root to another Plasma chain instead of Ethereum, forming a multi-layered structure called "nested chains"._

However, Plasma also introduces new challenges. When users withdraw assets from the Plasma chain, they must wait for a certain challenge period (usually 7 days). During this period, if anyone suspects the node operator of malicious activity, they can independently scrutinize the transaction records and submit fraud proofs <sup>[2]</sup>. Aside from the inconvenience caused by the withdrawal waiting period, various complex situations, such as "mass exits <sup>[3]</sup>," occur when nodes behave maliciously, which gradually reduces the appeal of the Plasma solution.

The root of these problems lies in **data availability**. Users need to acquire and monitor data from the node operator themselves. This is akin to a traffic accident happening on a mountain road without a black box installed in your car, making it very difficult to determine who should be held accountable for the accident.

So, **how can we address the issues arising from data unavailability?**

&nbsp; 
## Footnotes and Further Reading:

<sup>[1]</sup> Hash algorithms can transform texts of any length into fixed-length outputs (hash values) through hashing algorithms. A minor alteration in the input text will lead to a completely different hash value. By incorporating the hash value itself into the text to generate a new hash value, a tree-like structure called a Merkle tree is formed.

<sup>[2]</sup> Fraud proofs are employed to challenge illegal transactions and can be initiated by any entity. The challenge period during Plasma withdrawals is designed to allow time for third-party supervision, and only withdrawals that remain unchallenged during this period will be finalized.

<sup>[3]</sup> Mass exits refer to the collective desire of users to exit Plasma when they detect malicious behavior by the Plasma operator. This leads to a sudden surge in withdrawal requests, submission of fraud proofs, and other transactions, causing congestion on the Ethereum mainnet and thereby delaying the processing of other normal transactions for an extended period of time.

Merkle Tree: [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Merkle_tree](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Merkle_tree)


Plasma: Scalable Autonomous Smart Contracts: [https://www.plasma.io/plasma.pdf](https://www.plasma.io/plasma.pdf)

<GithubAvatar owner='lxdao-official' repo='myfirstlayer2-frontend' path='mdx/en/2.3-plasma.md' />

<EditChapter url='https://github.com/lxdao-official/myfirstlayer2-frontend/blob/main/mdx/en/2.3-plasma.md' />

